# IFS

## Introduction: What we were like, what happened, and what we are like now

Welcome, friends! On the behalf of my whole family, I am delighted to have all of you here, although several of us — everyone but Flora, honestly, because she’s a literal goddess — are more than a little anxious now that you’re here. It’s as though we’ve been planning an elaborate party for literally *decades,* which (if you can believe it) is how long our current arrangement has taken to evolve, and now that all the place cards have been calligraphed and all the crystal is gleaming — we have never thrown or even been to a party this fancy, to be clear, but we can imagine — we are standing facing our front door in our nicest possible outfit, scarcely daring to breathe, just after the first guest has rung the doorbell. 

// MAKE SURE PEOPLE KNOW THEY ARE WELCOME EVEN IF THEY DON’T KNOW THEY HAVE PARTS — THIS IS SOLVING A problem they don’t know they have.

Our stories disclose, in a particular way, what it’s like to be ourselves: a system of parts, an ecology, a culture (anthropological and microbial), a little crowd. Our purpose in sharing our experiences with you is, naturally, manifold. The scholars among us enjoy rolling around with interesting ideas just for the joy of it, so they are delighted to have an excuse. For those who have spent their whole careers amassing, examining, and organizing vast troves of mental objects of various kinds, this book is a retrospective exhibition curated from the very jewels of our collections — or perhaps more accurately, vibewise, a long-form special-interest infodump, or perhaps the intricately detailed tour of backyard plants a toddler might provide for a patient houseguest. The youngest of our number wants us to write this book just so we can read it to him at bedtime, which of course we will do (skipping over, of course, the parts that are only for grown-ups). And several of us, for whom healing and liberation are the most important kind of work, believe that sharing our experiences may be consoling for those whose struggles have been like ours. If you recognize glimmers of your own experience in these pages, we hope you will find not only practical tools for thinking with but also, and more importantly, the incomparable joy of finding out that, this *whole time*, you’ve never *not* been safe and sound in the company of many and loving friends. That joy, we believe, is your birthright. 

The perplexities with which my internal family has struggled may not be universal, but we strongly suspect they are very common indeed — perhaps no less common than neurodivergence, queer and nonbinary abilities, complex PTSD, a talent for making puns, and other common forms of oddity. Because such ways of life are seldom deeply or freely discussed, outside narrow circles of specialists and enthusiasts, many people who are really not very unusual — who may indeed spend their days unwittingly brushing shoulders with many others of their kind — spend their *entire lives* under the tragic misimpression that they are all alone in the world, akin to nobody, freakish and wrong, simply because they never happened to encounter the story of someone who happened to be odd in the same way they are. So tragically mistaken, this illusion of aloneness! That’s was how it was for queer children like us during the Reagan years. That’s how it still is for most neurodivergent people, almost everybody with complex PTSD, and people who are good at puns but cannot pass as dads. 

That is *exactly* how it is, here and now, for those of us who experience ourselves as more than just one person at a time. Accustomed to the common belief that sane people are necessarily unitary and consistent, we spend our lives feeling literally crazy, in a way we dare not admit to anyone. We are not just “too much” (though we are certainly can be a lot) — we are also, alarmingly, too many. Those of us who cannot hide their multiplicity from other people are often terribly persecuted, by external others or punitive parts of themselves or, usually, both. Those of us who *can* keep our multiplicity secret from others spend our lives feeling insane at best, insane at worst, and maddeningly inconsistent always. And those of us who keep our multiplicity secret from even ourselves are at constant risk of shattering without warning into hazardous shards. 

That is what happened to us in the feverish summer of 2020 — or rather, as I then imagined, to “me.” 

---- 

